I'm a clinical psychologist trained as
an anxiety specialist and I've helped
thousands of people overcome their
anxiety over the last 20 years, both
through my sessions and also through my
book. So, there's a lot I've learned
that I want you to know. So, here are 21
truths about anxiety that'll change how
you think and how you live. Let's go.
One, if you need anxiety to leave, it is
in charge. You're not. Think of anxiety
like an annoying house guest. If your
day depends on them leaving, then
they're calling the shots. But if you
can say, "Yep, I feel it. It's
uncomfortable, but I can live my life
anyway." Then you're back in control.
You're allowed to prefer feeling calm,
sure, but don't operate like you must
feel calm. Two, practice being that good
coach and saying supportive things to
yourself. Imagine you're a kid and every
time you mess up, the coach yells at
you. Well, you're going to be anxious
all the time, right? Well, that's what
harsh selft talk does. We think it helps
to motivate ourselves, but mostly it
just keeps us on edge. So, the bad
coaches, they dominate through fear and
shame. The good coaches, they still
challenge us to improve, but they do it
with support, with kindness, and a
belief in our ability to grow. They let
you know, yeah, mistakes are part of
learning, and you're still worthwhile.
Anxiety eases when you treat yourself
like someone worth supporting.
Three, anxiety and excitement are
siblings. Anxiety and calm, they sit on
opposite ends of the nervous system. One
says act, the other one says rest. So
trying to jump from one to the other, it
rarely works. It's too far. But anxiety
as a sibling, excitement, they feel
almost the same in the body, right? The
same sort of heart rate, the same
energy. But whereas one focuses on the
risks, the other focuses on rewards. So
when anxiety shows up, don't try to
clamp it down. Transform it. Ask, "What
can I gain from facing this situation?
What can I learn? How could going
through this make me stronger?" You
don't need to slow down and calm down.
You need to aim that energy you have in
a better direction. Number four, micro
dose discomfort. Anxiety does its real
damage by making you avoid what feels
uncomfortable. But pulling back again
and again only makes your world smaller.
So the antidote, well, you have to move
towards what scares you, but not all at
once. So a common problem that I see
people make is they try to take a big
leap towards their fear and it
overwhelms them. They freeze up and then
they think, well, I guess I can't do it.
But the problem wasn't them. It was the
size of the step. So start small, like
really small. Micro dose the discomfort.
Feel a little of it and then get used to
it. Then repeat. It feels minimal,
right? But you are building tolerance.
And I've seen it again and again. If you
keep going, you'll be amazed when you
turn and look back and see how far
you've come. Five. You're not anxious.
You're a person currently experiencing
anxiety. That difference matters because
when you identify with the anxiety, when
you only see the world through its eyes,
it gains power. But when you say, "I'm
having anxious thoughts pop in or I'm
feeling the sensations of fear through
my body," you create distance and space,
and you take your power back. You aren't
anxious. You are the person observing
the anxiety. Six, emotions or waves.
surf them. Picture me out in the ocean.
I like calm water, so when a wave comes,
I start punching it and then it just
takes me and dumps me under. But what if
instead I get on a surfboard and I ride
that wave? Well, everything shifts.
Emotions are waves also. They rise, they
peak, and then they fall if you don't
fight them and you just observe. When
anxiety comes, feel the sensations as
they move through your body. Watch them
as they change. They always change. Life
gets a lot easier when you stop
resisting and you start riding the wave.
Seven, stop waiting for the risk to
disappear. Act without guarantees. Life
is unpredictable. The things that
actually go wrong are rarely the ones
you are bracing for. You can't erase all
risk before you act. And trying to will
just keep your world small. Instead, you
learn how to keep going even with
uncertainty and how to sit with the
emotion that comes when things don't go
your way. Right? You can spend your
whole life waiting until things feel
safe. But life never gives full
guarantees. Even when you plan
perfectly, most of what actually goes
wrong is stuff that you never saw
coming. You can't wait until the risk is
gone or you will never take the steps
that matter. The work is learning to act
anyway. even when things feel shaky.
That is how you make progress. So, show
up anyway. Show up before you're ready.
Eight. Stop putting out fires that
aren't burning. Picture this. You're
stomping through the woods, dumping
buckets of water everywhere, afraid of
the damage that a fire might do, but you
don't actually know where the fire will
be or if there'll even be one today.
That is a lot of wasted time, energy,
and stress. And that is what worry does.
Most of what we fear never happens and
the real problems, well, we can trust
our future selves to handle them when
they come. So save your water for real
fires. Nine, you don't know what will
happen, and that's okay. So much anxiety
comes from trying to be sure, to
eliminate all doubt, all risk, all
unknowns. But certainty isn't something
we get to have. What we can have is a
mindset that says yes I don't know what
will happen. I prefer X would happen but
if Y happens I will find a way to cope
and that will make me stronger. That's
not giving up control. That's building
confidence where it really matters. 10.
You're anxious because you learned how
to survive. If you have a sensitive
nervous system like me, it's not your
fault. It likely learned to stay alert
because it had to in order to keep you
safe in the world you grew up in. That
hyper awareness probably helped you
survive. But the problem now is that it
hasn't caught up to present day. It
still thinks that you're in that same
old environment. So instead of getting
mad at it, help it update. Show it
gently that life is different now. And
so are you. You're more mature. You have
more tools. You got more experience and
more knowledge than you used to. You're
not a kid anymore. 11. Let anxiety be or
befriend it. Just don't fight it. When
anxiety shows up, there are three
possible ways you could respond. Two are
good, one is bad. You can let it just be
there. Neutral, no big deal. Just let it
hang out in the background while you go
about living your life. It'll fade when
it's ready. Or you can go one step
further. Turn towards it. Get curious.
ask what it needs. That kind of kindness
actually quietensed it down over time.
So the only bad option, fighting it.
Trying to shut it down only makes it
louder. So for most people I work with
the real healing starts when we stop
treating anxiety like an enemy and we
start seeing it as a part of ourselves
that we don't have to fear and we don't
have to fight. 12. Don't wait till you
feel good. just take anxiety with you. A
lot of people wait until the anxiety
goes away before they do the things that
matter to them. But that moment often
never comes. The truth is, you can feel
all of those sensations, the tension,
the racing thoughts, and still take the
step forward. Anxiety is only a problem
when it makes you choose to stop. So
don't stop, just bring it with you. 13.
You don't need to avoid it. You need to
survive it.
Anxiety always exaggerates the risks. So
you might end up feeling a bit safer if
you were to take a chance and then
nothing goes wrong. But your brain still
says, "Yeah, but what if it goes wrong
next time?" But if instead when you face
the fear, it does go wrong and yet you
get through it, something shifts. You
stop needing things to go perfectly
because you've shown yourself you can
handle it. So confidence doesn't come
from avoiding the feared outcome. It
comes from surviving it. So don't avoid
the hard stuff. Train for it. That's how
anxiety starts to lose its power. 14. Be
careful what you feed your brain. If you
ate poison every day, you would not be
shocked when your body gets sick. But a
lot of us do the same thing with our
minds, right? We're constantly feeding
it anxious, fear-based content. Anxiety
is a lot easier to create than it is to
extinguish and calm down. Once we get it
running, it wants to just keep on
running, right? So, let's stop feeding
it. I've had clients who've come in
telling me they're terrified of home
invasions all of a sudden, and it turns
out they've been binge watching crime
shows all week. Your brain learns what's
dangerous and how to react by what you
show it. So, let's be deliberate about
what you feed it. And, you know, maybe
try a cleanse. 15. Give your worry a
time slot. Most of us stress about
things the second that they pop into our
heads just because like that's when it
showed up. But we know that the more
total time you spend spinning on
worries, the more anxious you'll get.
So, here's a fix. Set a daily worry
time. Like literally a slot in your
schedule. When worry hits, don't just
dive into it. Say, "Ah, cool. I will
think about this during worry time. You
can write it down if you need to. Like,
you're not ignoring it. You're just
rescheduling it." And often when that
time rolls around, a lot of the time it
won't actually feel that important
anymore. You'll be asking yourself,
"Wait, why did I care so much about this
when it popped up?" 16. Don't meditate.
Just count to 50. You've probably heard
meditation helps with anxiety. But for a
lot of people, it can feel too
complicated or overwhelming to actually
follow through on. So, let's make it
simple and actually useful. Here's what
you do. Count your breaths. One on the
inhale, two on the exhale, three on the
inhale, four on the exhale, and go all
the way to 50. If you lose count, then
you know that you were lost in thought.
And catching that is the whole point. So
start again at one, go to 50. The
counting itself makes it hard to think
and ruminate. And monitoring the breath
forces your attention back to your body.
So you will breathe better. You'll also
think less and you'll feel more in
control. 17. The wrong people keep you
on edge. If you have to stay small to
avoid
criticism, if one wrong move can set
somebody off, then your threat system
will always stay on. Like, it doesn't
matter how calm things are right now in
the moment, your brain is still bracing
for that next hit. And
yes, we'll accept you probably get
something out of that relationship or
those relationships. Maybe they're fun
or exciting or like really kind when
they're in a good mood. But despite
that, you're paying for it emotionally.
It's not worth trading your worth for
their approval. The right people don't
make you shrink. They help you expand.
They help you settle and become more
like yourself. 18. Fire your insecurity
guards.
So, you know how security guards are
supposed to keep the troublemakers out
and let the right people in? Well, I
find a lot of us have hired insecurity
guards instead. They deny the positive
things that happen. Ah, it was just luck
or they were just being polite or they
don't know my flaws yet. But when
criticism or anything negative shows up,
they're like, "Oh, hey, VIP access, come
right in front row. Can I get you some
bottle service and some sparklers? These
guards aren't protecting you. They're
keeping you insecure. You don't need
tougher guards. You need fair ones. The
kind that treat you like someone worth
protecting. Let the good stuff in. You
need that to grow. 19. Thank them for
opting out. You can't be liked by
everyone. And honestly, we don't have
time for everyone. So own who you are
and show people that. Let them filter
themselves in or out. And when someone
filters themselves out, just say
silently to yourself, "Thank you for
showing me you're not one of my people.
All the best." That frees up your time,
your energy, and your attention for the
people who do get you and who actually
deserve it. 20. Real strength is letting
people in. We often think staying silent
is strong, but most of the time I find
that it's driven by fear. It's a fear of
judgment or fear of rejection. But
hiding how we feel doesn't help.
Research shows that suppressing emotions
actually raises our blood pressure and
it keeps us from getting the support we
need. The key, of course, is choosing
the right people, the ones who've earned
your trust and then giving them a chance
to show up for you. When we open up,
something shifts. People feel closer to
us. They like us more. We like them
more. And they often start opening up,
too. Support helps regulate your nervous
system. So find people who get you and
talk to them. 21. Own the rights to your
life story. Most people don't notice
they've already written a story about
their life. They just assume it's the
truth. But in reality, the same
combination of all these different
experiences can be seen as entirely
different stories depending on how you
frame it or where you place the camera.
Like, are you behind in life? Or are you
actually a rebel who is bravely
exploring a new and difficult path?
Like, did you fail? Or is this the point
in your story arc where the hero faces
an obstacle they have to learn to
overcome? You don't have to force
optimism here. Just recognize that how
you organize the pieces of the story of
your life shapes how it feels to live
it. This video covers 21 insights, but
it's only part of the full list that I
wrote. If you want the complete set to
keep, click the link below. Okay, that
is one piece of the puzzle. to keep
going. Watch this video next.